Gs 00006 (#40)
bitsandvolts/bitsandvolts.github.io: _posts/2022-03-05-gs_00006_file_permissions.md

---
layout: single
title: File Permissions
category: Getting Started
permalink: /categories/getting_started/file_permissions
excerpt: "A Linux security mechanism."
author: Bjoern Hartmann
toc: true
toc_label: "Content"
toc_sticky: true
toc_icon: "align-justify"
sidebar:
  nav: "getting_started_0"
header:
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  overlay_image: /assets/images/getting_started.jpg
---

Hello and welcome back to a new post, where we want to fill a small gap from our

> previous posts, namely **file permissions** or **privileges**. If you have been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
previous posts, namely **file permissions**, or **privileges**. If you have been
```

> following our **Getting Started** category, you have seen the following command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
following our posts in the **Getting Started** category, you have seen the following command
```

at a few points:

    $ chmod +x open_firefox.sh

If this command is completely new to you, feel free to read the previous posts
or keep reading because we explain it from the beginning. Let's get started!

# What are file permissions?

We already mentioned that a Linux system can be shared by multiple users. Now,
imagine you are working on a very important project. Then, you don't want that

> another user can manipulate it. If it is a secret project, you probably don’t

Reviewer: Maybe to sound more engaging/humorous:
```suggestion
another user can manipulate it. If it is a top-secret project, you probably don’t
```

> another user can manipulate it. If it is a secret project, you probably don’t

Reviewer: ```suggestion
another user can manipulate the project. If it is a secret project, you probably don’t
```

Author: A bit too much usage of the word project with this suggestion. What do you think?

Reviewer: Ok

> even want any other user to see it. To handle such situations, Linux offers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
even want any other user to see it. To handle such scenarios, Linux offers
```

Reviewer: You can decide which word you prefer.

of Linux. We don't want to dive too deep into this topic, but maybe you can
imagine that wrong permissions can open the doors for all kinds of security
issues. For now, we just want you to understand why you might get a "permission
denied" error as we have seen in previous posts.

# How to handle file permissions?

Enough about theory! Let's get our fingers on the keyboard! Open a terminal,
create a folder, change into it, and create a file:

    $ mkdir permissions
    $ cd permissions
    $ touch test

If this was too fast, don't worry. Take your time and read our posts
[Terminal Basics](/categories/getting_started/terminal_basics) and
[Terminal Basics II](/categories/getting_started/terminal_basics2). Now, we want
to check the owner and permissions of the created file using the known `ls`
command with a parameter:

    $ ls -l

<div class='note-normal' markdown="1">
Note: `ls -l` list all files in the current folder. You can also use
`ls -l test` to list the permissions of our specific test file.
</div>

<figure class="img-center" style="width:90%">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_00006_ls.png" alt="">
</figure>

> To be honest, this looks a bit scary at the beginning, but it is not that

Reviewer: It would be helpful to draw rectangles around the permission trios and point with arrows at them to tell what they are.

Author: check [274a90e](https://github.com/bitsandvolts/bitsandvolts.github.io/pull/40/commits/274a90eed461dc62cad1f594f8ac87b09d45bbec)

Reviewer: Looks good!

> difficult. First, you see a combination of letters and dashes. The first symbol

Reviewer: Maybe we should mention which line (in this case the last one) we are referring to?

Author: Check [274a90e](https://github.com/bitsandvolts/bitsandvolts.github.io/pull/40/commits/274a90eed461dc62cad1f594f8ac87b09d45bbec)

syntax using numeric values that is commonly used for file permissions. If you
want to set all permissions (read, write and execute) for the file's owner and
no permissions for everyone else you can also use the following command:

    $ chmod 700 test

How does this work? Behind the previously used `chmod` command, you see three
digits. The first represents the owner permissions, the second the permissions
for the group, and the last for all others. The following table shows the value
for each permission.

| Permission | Value |
| ---------- | ----- |
| Execute    | 1     |
| Write      | 2     |
| Read       | 4     |

If you want to combine multiple permissions you just add up the values.
execute + read + write is represented by 1 + 2 + 4 = 7. The other two values are
zero since we do not have any permissions for the group and others.

<div class='note-exercise' markdown="1">
Exercise:

What would be the command for our exam example? Teacher (owner) has read + write
permissions, participating students (group) has read and everyone else has no
permissions.

</div>

The solution is:

    $ chmod 640 test

You can decide for yourself which way you prefer. The way from the previous

> section is maybe easier to remember, but it’s completely up to you.

Reviewer: The last part of this sentence is kind of redundant, as we already said something similar in the previous sentence.

Maybe we can write something like
```suggestion
section is maybe easier to remember, but both achieve the same goal.
```

# Summary

Congratulations! Now, you should be able to explain why you get a **permission
denied** error:

- Use `ls -l`to check the file permissions
- If you don't have the necessary permission you'll get a _permission denied_
  error

> - Linux differentiate between **owner**, **group**, and **other**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Linux differentiates between **owner**, **group**, and **other**
```

- You can **read**, **write** or **execute** a file
- Use `chmod` to change the permissions
- One way is to use the abbreviations, e.g. `chmod ugo=wrx test` (u=owner,
  g=group, o=other, w=write, r=read, x=execute)
- The other way is to use numerical values like `chmod 640 test`

We leave two small topics as a bonus. We didn't explain how to set the owner or
group of a file. If you are interested, look for the `chown` command using a
search engine of your choice or the **man page**. Do you still remember what it
is? If not, we invite you to read our Terminal Basics posts. Also, we didn't
explain how to create a group and add users to it. Here the keyword you can
search for is `groupadd`. However, we probably won't need these commands in our
upcoming posts.

> Yay! Done! This post completes our Linux basics series. The next post starts

Reviewer: Maybe we could add a quick summary of the series here? But it's not a must.

Author: I think about it

Author: I think I am going to start with it in the next post
